Add endpoint documentation (#6290)
fleetdm/fleet: docs/Contributing/Adding-new-endpoints.md

# API Endpoints HOWTO

## Steps to add a new endpoint

There are two main ways to add a new endpoint to the Fleet API:

1. Building the data layer first (datastore) and then going up the stack until the API endpoint.
2. Building the API endpoint and then going down the stack until the datastore.

For the sake of ease of writing this document, we'll cover case 1. If you prefer to build in more of an option 2 style
you can simply read the documentation bottom up.

### Step 1: Datastore

> So let's say you want to add an endpoint that would count the total number of hosts enrolled in Fleet. A SQL query for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say you want to add an endpoint that would count the total number of hosts enrolled in Fleet. A SQL query for
```

gathering this data could be the following:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM hosts
```

So let's create a function for this within the mysql datastore in the [hosts.go file](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/datastore/mysql/hosts.go):

```go
func (ds *Datastore) CountAllHost(ctx context.Context) (int, error) {
    var hostCount int
    err := sqlx.GetContext(ctx, db, &hostCount, `SELECT COUNT(*) FROM hosts`)
    if err != nil {
        return 0, err
    }
    return hostCount, nil
}
```

Now this is part of the `Datastore` struct. In order to use it in an endpoint, we need this to be exposed by the `Datastore`
interface. So we add this method [to it](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/fleet/datastore.go#L25):

```go
type Datastore interface {
	// rest of the interface here
	
    CountAllHost(ctx context.Context) (int, error)
}
```

> Now we are ready to create a method in the service.

Reviewer 2: We should probably mention here that we need to run `go generate ./...` after the `Datastore` interface is modified?

### Step 2: Service

In order to use this new Datastore function we created, the layer that is in communication with it is the `Service` 
which is both [an interface](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/fleet/service.go#L41) and 

> [a struct](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/service.go#L25) that implements that interface.

Reviewer: I think it would benefit the reader if we're more precise here, we have an interface `fleet.Service` and an struct `service.Service` that implements the interface.

	// ...
}
```

We added 4 things above:

1. The struct that represents details about the request that we might receive. If the request could have query 
parameters, or a JSON body, etc, this is where we would define it.
2. The struct for the response. This struct has to implement the `errorer` [interface](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/transport_error.go#L21).
3. The implementation of the only method in the `errorer` interface.
4. The endpoint function handler itself.

Now it's time to expose this to be used.

### Step 4: Exposing the new API

The whole API can be seen in the [handler.go file](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/handler.go).
Most there is to know about what API is being expose lives in this file and particularly within the 
`attachFleetAPIRoutes`.

Since this endpoint is a user authenticated endpoint, we'll add it at the end of the `ue` (user authenticated) endpoints 
of the function mentioned:

```go
func attachFleetAPIRoutes(r *mux.Router, svc fleet.Service, config config.FleetConfig,
	logger kitlog.Logger, limitStore throttled.GCRAStore, opts []kithttp.ServerOption,
	extra extraHandlerOpts,
) {
	// ...

> 	ue.GET("/api/_version_/fleet/hosts/count_all", countAllHostsEndpoint, countAllHostsRequest)

Reviewer 2: We should probably say a word about the `_version_` placeholder in the path here, and point to the versioning document for more details.

but not a lot.

The reason this layer implements the `Service` interface is to allow for another implementation of this interface to 
exist: [the enterprise/premium service that holds all the premium features](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/tree/main/ee).

We don't use this to mock the service layer in tests.

### HTTP Handler

The HTTP layer is where all HTTP logic lives. Where structures go from query parameters or JSON bodies to structs that 
the service layer understands.

This layer is tested in the integrations tests:

- [Core](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/integration_core_test.go)
- [License](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/integration_ds_only_test.go)
- [Premium features](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/integration_enterprise_test.go)
- [Live queries](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/integration_live_queries_test.go)
- [Logger](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/integration_logger_test.go)
- [SSO](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/integration_sso_test.go)

## Queries, Request bodies, and other decoding facts

> Before we dive into specifics, let's discuss some generics around the framework we are using and other tools that have

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before we dive into specifics, let's discuss some context around the framework we are using and other tools that have
```

been implemented.

The main thing to be aware is that Fleet is using `go-kit` underneath. With it, we get all the concepts from the 

> framework such as decoders, transport, etc. `go-kit` is no longer the best framework for Fleet to use anymore, but the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
framework such as decoders, transport, etc. We have decided `go-kit` is no longer the best framework for Fleet to use anymore, but the 
```

cost of replacing it is higher than the cost of building some of the tooling we'll discuss here and maintaining it.

The tools that were built were meant to abstract away layers that `go-kit` leaves available to its users in a way that 
makes sense for our use case. 

For instance, we found ourselves implementing extremely similar request decoding code. It varied very slightly from one 
implementation to the next, and it varied in ways that Go wasn't capable of handling at the time. So we wrote a [generic

> decoder](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/endpoint_utils.go#L90) that uses reflect to 

Reviewer: nit for clarity:

```suggestion
decoder](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/endpoint_utils.go#L90) that uses reflection to 
```

OR

```suggestion
decoder](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/endpoint_utils.go#L90) that uses `reflect` to 
```

understand what kind of request it is and the destination and decodes it correctly.

> Then the problem was: I have to specify this decoder _every time I create a new endpoint_. And creating new endpoints 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then the problem was to specify this decoder _every time a new endpoint is created_. And creating new endpoints 
```

`query:"name_of_the_parameter"` and the decoder looks for that parameter in there. If the query parameter can be 
optional, you can add the `,optional` suffix to the parameter name: `query:"param1,optional"`. Otherwise, the request 
will error out. Here's an [example of this](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/hosts.go#L407) in 
use.

Optional parameters can be pointers, in which case it's `nil` if it's omitted. If the optional parameter is not a 
pointer, the zero value for the type is set.

## How to add default listing options

There are shortcuts for bundles of query parameters such as `list_options` which results in parameters such as page and 
order to be added among others. Here's an 
[example of this](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/labels.go#L171).

## How to add URL variables

If you want to assign a part of a URL to a variable, such as an ID for an entity, you can define this by specifying 
`url:"id"` in the tag in the Request struct and in between `{}` in the URL for the handler where that variable is placed. For instance:
`"/api/_version_/fleet/labels/{id:[0-9]+}"` and can be found in 

> [this example](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/handler.go#L341). URL variable are not optional.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[this example](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/service/handler.go#L341). URL variables cannot be optional.
```

# API Endpoints HOWTO

## Steps to add a new endpoint

There are two main ways to add a new endpoint to the Fleet API:

1. Building the data layer first (datastore) and then going up the stack until the API endpoint.
2. Building the API endpoint and then going down the stack until the datastore.

For the sake of ease of writing this document, we'll cover case 1. If you prefer to build in more of an option 2 style
you can simply read the documentation bottom up.

### Step 1: Datastore

Let's say you want to add an endpoint that would count the total number of hosts enrolled in Fleet. A SQL query for
gathering this data could be the following:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM hosts
```

So let's create a function for this within the mysql datastore in the [hosts.go file](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/main/server/datastore/mysql/hosts.go):

```go
func (ds *Datastore) CountAllHost(ctx context.Context) (int, error) {
    var hostCount int

>     err := sqlx.GetContext(ctx, db, &hostCount, `SELECT COUNT(*) FROM hosts`)

Reviewer 4: `s/db/ds.reader/`
